Let's define developer 2 as the second developer you add to a team.  What changes?

In many of the projects I've worked on I've been developer 2.

So a customer, a project manager, and a solution architect get together. They devise a plan.  The solution architect let's say is AWS certified.  Great. Sounds really accomplished.  They win the work and then get started.  The principal engineer starts working on his own.  There is no DevSecOps, CI/CD, or any real testing or branching strategy.  Everything can be pushed as far to production as exists.  The risk of breaking anything is very low.  The possibility of bottlenecks very low.  As the word principle suggests, he is developer one. He is the first.  And boy is he moving fast.

The customer is happy and more money is added and it's time to expand.  That's where I come in.  Sometimes with others also.  This is just the N>1 problem.  What has to change in order for this to be better and not worse?

To understand the lens which I look through this situation after ten years of engineering experience we have to look back to the beginning.

After only a year and a half of being an engineer, I entered a senior position.  And six months into that position, I was underwater and screaming for help.  Only to realize that when you're drowning and someone jumps in and also can't swim, you have to help them before you can help yourself.  Person that was sent to me didn't even have a CS degree.  The language, the communication, the culture, the foundation was all missing.  But it was too late now. And so I took the time to to reduce my own tasking and to try to help them catch up.  Within a matter of weeks, they're proficient in both React front end and spring framework back end.  How?  Because I left patterns and hints and paired with them so that they could get spun up very quickly and find their way on their own.  I believe I practised technical empathy.  I didn't do this perfectly and to say I wasn't frustrated is an understatement.  But we didn't drown.

Fast forward to the day and I've worked with so many people, senior to me, better paid than me, more years of experience than me, and don't have technical empathy.  Empty Jira issues. Zero Tasking. Zero availability. Zero clarity.  Just here. Go solve this.  When I've come back with questions, I'm met with surprise, frustration, pedantic over explanations, no attempt to develop any relationship to move forward.  What does this look like on the systems level?  This principal engineer still pushes directly to the deployment environment when testing.  Things are regularly broken and work commonly stops.  This lack of insight in the effects and consequences of our own actions is unfortunately more common than I ever thought possible.  Relationship and mindfulness might be two of the most valuable assets that we have as human beings.

Okay, so here's me wrapping up my complaints and offering a solution.  Since all of these people before me are senior to me, I can't tell them what to do, and all of my attempts to draw attention to the situation sound like childish complaints and "temper tantrums." So instead on more projects than I can count, I've taken the time to carve out No matter what it takes methods skills tactics to always be able to keep working no matter what the situation is.  

Another solution is to get ahead of it.  Many years ago on another team I was developer 1 and I very quickly was assigned developer 2.  Being in a position where you can look ahead and anticipate the needs of others. This is where the magic happens.  Compound interest can also be experienced in development teams.  At the onset, I set an expectation of a very loose Development process.  It was sane, it was not rigid, and it just worked.  We looked out for each other.  We also had simple boundary and a loose contract between it.  Across which we could both operate, but knew we were not the expert and the other's domain.  And. It. Worked.  A simple handshake and agreement at the beginning of a project and communication just flowed.  Yes, this can be done.

I wish I could take credit for this final story.  But I was only a participant.  At GE I was a member of a total team of teams of over 100 developers.  We pushed to production regularly.  Bottlenecks for minimal.  Issues resolved quickly.  Defects that made it to the eyes of the users happen, but we're few and far between. And we're fixed in a matter of days.  And by fixed I mean in production.  It is a surprising fact to witness that ever since there has been a complete disregard for any strategy to reach this pinnacle of efficiency.  And whether it's growth at all costs, incompetence or immaturity, or simply the contract or the business doesn't call for quality engineering.  Whatever the reason, whatever the incentives or lack thereof, the result is not something I could ever be proud of.

As teenagers we're taught about the idea of defensive driving.  There's always someone on the road that is likely going to kill you.  Be ready.  The same goes for development.  Someone is going to break things. Are you able to keep going?  Or do you become the bottleneck?

Developer 2 is an example of a stressor in the software development build process.  What happens when developer 2 is added?

To understand more about the system you're involved in, you can replace Developer 2 with any random simulation.  What happens when X? This is not a big up front design.  This is the reality of dealing with complex systems.

As soon as you start increasing N you start increasing the number of interactions K that are required in order for the system to continue. P is the bias towards the attractors N and K can be organized in.  Do you want your bias to be bottlenecks and developers or agents starved for resources?  Or do you want streamlined efficiency and reduced total cost of ownership (TCO)?


[More on Kaufmann Networks](https://scottrbrtsn.github.io/2025/11/18/kaufmann-networks.html)
