## Saving Lives in spite of wicked problems.

I live in Huntsville.  I, like every other individual supporting Federal contracts, has been generally accused simply of "building things that kill people." As if we are all psychopaths with 1 mission.  But is this really true? 

First, you can read the Art of War: "“The supreme art of war is to subdue the enemy without fighting.”"

Second, you can build relationships with actual service members, look them in the eyes, watch their actions, hear their words.  Without this nuance, can you truly accuse them of simply "building things that kill people?"  

Third, understand, some efforts (like many I seek out), are about saving lives, period.  Sons, daughters, brothers, sisters, friends, we all want them to come home.  

Why we should care:
"...between October 2001 and June 2011, one in every four deaths of U.S. service members was from a potentially survivable injury. Based on this astonishing reality, substantial investments in improving prehospital care and the deployed trauma system were implemented. Maturation and continuous evidence-based MPO of the trauma system over time resulted in a 44 percent decrease in deaths from battlefield trauma"

The problem of the day:
"...unrealistic expectations for documentation. An example of this was when a senior medical officer insisted that medics document a full “PAMPI”—a medical history to include problems, allergies, medications, procedures, and immunizations—and behavior health visits prior to placing a tourniquet on a bleeding casualty."  

The absurdity of disconnected executive leadership still persists as decisions are made about wicked problems without even the slightest understanding of the actual implications impacting service providers.  This is the problem of the day.  There is some mental fallacy, or promotion driven development, which believes if we just use the right magic words (e.g. #AI), and use the right magic tools (e.g. software), success will be conjured for all.  

This absurdity is not unique.  

Do you know what saline is? Water, salt, baking soda. Our very own Huntsville Hospital used to (c. 1970s) train physicians to make their own saline.  Now it comes from China.  Did you know, during COVID (and probably still today), physicians were restricted from making their own saline?  #liability.  But also, there were supply chain issues for obvious reasons... This is, only one example, of the same local absurdity trickling down from executive leadership. 

Instead, we aim to build systems which extract and deliver only the necessary and sufficient data, at the optimal time, to the people who need it: to save lives. To do this our deepest combat is not with flesh and blood, but the hearts and minds within ourselves. Are we really solving the problems we set out to solve, or are we making matters worse?   

All said, I am wholeheartedly proud to support an effort, one which verifiably saves lives while simultaneously addressing one of the deepest rooted problems we face as a society today: absurdity rolling downhill. 


